Kut who's an assistant professor of
public policy with the Doha Institute
for Graduate Studies he's also a
specialist on conflict resolution and
international Aid welcome back to Al
jazer so who do you think is calling the
shots right now when it comes to uh the
ceasefire and and what happens next uh
it's a very complicated question Darin I
think everyone has has a say more or
less in this very what can I ask you
then is the ball in someone's courtt or
or do we not know that I think the
Americans have the leverage for sure the
US the us is the key player here I mean
there have been some reports coming out
that Netanyahu surrendered to pressure
from the US to enable this truth to
happen so the Americans they hold the
the stick let me put it this way um uh
so yes I think if their involvement is
key the qataris and the Egyptians of
course the mediators are very important
here and uh and let's hope it it gets
extended you know it's that's that's the
thing the thing is to to stop and uh I
mean because there are two two things
that are going right now one is the
release today and if and whether it will
actually happen and then the other thing
of course is whether that ceasefire is
going to be extended and you know what I
mean and there's also a missing element
here also a third one which I would uh
like to discuss further it's the lack of
any political parallel political track
you know to talk about the big issues
because everything is is connected to
each other so when we say the Israelis
want to extend the truth at the same
time they have this these conflicting
goals of topling down hamas's rule Hamas
will be nervous so it will try also to
hold to its grounds so the discussion is
missing the the elephant in the room
which is what's next because the
political track for the Palestinian
Israeli conflict or the is is it has to
be discussed now because for example I
mean this war happens in a context of a
Palestinian split the Palestinian
Authority in ramala is very nervous they
don't want to take over over Gaza in in
during the split you know because Hamas
is still there no one no one wants no
one wants to see a Civil War in in Gaza
for for instance so will Israel manage
will is manage to topple down Hamas rule
in Gaza or not so far there's so many
big questions but what the International
Community should focus on is why not to
open a dialogue on these matters again
which is the entire Palestinian split
question and the the peace process again
because these go in parallel with with
the truths and and with also the option
or the goal of toppling down Hamad
or whether or not Hamas has a future in
Gaza but there is no discuss I what
you're saying but um are are both the
the Israelis as well as the Palestinian
sides ready to uh talk about these uh
these these big issues right now I mean
we heard from the Israeli Prime Minister
just about 24 hours ago when he visited
the Gaza Strip and he said we're ready
to continue this war yeah but but we
also we read uh Joe Biden's op piece in
the Washington Post where he's he says
he's committed to a two two St Solutions
what does this mean in his opinion a
two-state solution it means Palestinians
has to have will need to have a United
leadership and an independent state as
well so how is he going to achieve this
or what comes first really I don't think
anything comes first in this situation
there has to be a third track a paril
track where these things should have
should be discussed now and there are
rumors that in some in some in some
countries some Arab capitals and
countries there are already discussions
on these scenarios on the future of
Hamas whether Hamas will accept a
partner in the Gaza Strip or not but
these are all critical issues I think if
if if we have some clarity on them like
let's say if Israel realizes that the
the goal of topping down Hamas is not
realistic which I don't think it's
realistic then then this will might give
an opportunity for the truth to be
prolonged and then we we we expand the
discussion on the bigger issues right so
and and there the US and International
Community has to push for this we don't
wait we don't keep this war between
prolonging a truce or ending a truce or
or or restarting the war but we open a
third parall track where we say let's
discuss the big elephant in the room
which is the Israeli Palestinian
conflict the Palestinians and their
future stat look one thing that is being
discussed in the US is in fact and this
is according to the Wall Street Journal
American Media reporting that some
members of Congress are now voicing
support for putting conditions on Aid to
Israel in order to limit civilian deaths
in the war particularly the one
Democratic senator Chris Murphy said
that uh that he was open to this idea of
placing conditions is this
unprecedented it is it is of course it
is and I see it as a very positive sign
I mean it's a change in American in the
internal American politics Biden is
nervous as well I mean his popularity is
is under questioning here you know
because of what the Americans see the
way the way this this brutal War has has
been managed and the US's blind support
to Israel I mean you see so it's I think
this is a critical time even for the US
Administration so it and it could be an
opportunity for them as well if they're
serious about pushing for the peace
agenda the big big elephant in the room
then they should immediately open a
parall track on this big question and
start a discussion with Hamas and fat
and Israel as well I personally don't
believe that topping down Hamas is an
option unless Israel wants to reoccupy
the entire G Gaza Strip and then he here
we are talking about a big transfer
scenario as well population transfer to
Egypt I don't think it's realistic it's
happening so the Israelis also are in a
very narrow angle here so they have to
meet in the middle and the Americans the
US Administration has a big role in this
game all right thank you so much tamed
for the time being tamed there